a wall of water falling on land and
flowing forwards in a quick and powerful
mass of streams
eroding the ground and demolishing all
structures it meets on its way
leaving nothing behind it could have
been a depiction of a tsunami
but it's a human-made cataclysm a dam
failure
the earliest known disaster of this kind
happened almost 1500 years ago in the
arabian peninsula
in the ancient kingdom of sabah
archaeologists say the first attempts to
build a dam and
irrigation canals were made as early as
2000 bce
1200 years later the people of sabah
transformed these early structures
into the great dam of marib with its
help
they captured rain and flood water
brought by monsoons
and canals they built delivered this
water to their fields
the great dam stood for many centuries
but time has no pity
as years went by the mighty structure
grew increasingly shabby
and repairs took more and more time and
effort
it was breached several times until in
575 ce
rainwater overflowed and the dam gave
way
inundating the land beyond in a
devastating flood
the irrigation system was destroyed and
people decided the dam was best to be
left alone
nearly 50 000 people moved from their
homes to other places
today a new dam stands in the place of
the historical one
built in 1980 and functioning well
a dam can be natural too though when
such a thing bursts
nothing good comes of it either in
sweden there once was a melt water lake
formed because of glacial debris
blocking the course of a river
this natural dam was overflowed and a
spectacular cascade of water fell
100 feet down to continue as a river
again
in the 18th century though several towns
were built along the banks of the river
and thanks to lush forests logging
industry boomed there
there was a major obstacle to
transporting the logs however
that same waterfall called gadungsan
rivers were convenient for moving the
forest but when it reached the rapids
much of it was lost that's why in 1794
locals received permission to dig a
bypass canal to change the course of the
river
and safely transport logs through it the
work was finished despite many troubles
and the water began to flow but then
in the spring of 1796 a heavy flood made
the lake leak
and then burst into the artificial canal
people ran for their lives to the high
ground
and no one was hurt but the breach
itself was terrible
a wall of water taller than any building
of the time
passed through the town downstream and
the flow raged for several hours
as the lake emptied itself into the
canal in the end
there was no lake to speak of at all it
forcefully went into a bypass
causing a lot of damage to property and
the surrounding land
people reported that salmon abundant in
the river was lying around on the banks
and hung in trees
eventually though the dry lake bed
became a fertile farmland
in a much more recent event a human-made
dam was breached because
nature doesn't give slack to anyone in
the tallest earthen dam in the u.s was
completed
the oroville dam it's located not far
from the city of oroville in california
and was built to contain water from the
feather river
the dam had two spillways the main one
through which excess water was released
in large amounts
and an emergency one that looked like a
sloped wall
over which water could spill too the
main spillway had a hard and sturdy
concrete channel
while the emergency one had only a
natural earth and slope
when too much water accumulated and the
emergency spillway had to be used
the slope would slowly erode but that
never actually happened
so no one paid much attention to it in
2017 though
the situation suddenly changed a crater
appeared in the channel of the main
spillway
and the flow was stopped not to damage
it further
but the water level rose too fast at
first it burst over the emergency
spillway
as the engineers expected it would but
within the next few days
the water started to destroy the slope
beneath and rapidly
to avoid this the main spillway was
opened again
even though it hadn't been properly
repaired as a result the rushing flood
went on pummeling the already damaged
chute
and soon the concrete surrendered in
nature
water gushed into the hole and washed
away the soil beneath
in just a few days water flowing from
the main spillway
changed its course and created a new
channel to the side
the soil and debris carried by the new
stream blocked the river down
below causing the hydroelectric plant to
stop
but the worst was still ahead the
erosion of the slope could go up to the
main gate of the dam
or to the emergency spillway barrier if
either of these occurred
the lake would crash down uncontrollably
on the land below
where thousands of people lived and
worked luckily the disaster never
happened
and the spill was finally taken under
control
another dam breach proves that even the
best of them aren't perfect
the tomsk pump storage plant in missouri
was about to receive an award for
innovation
in september 2005. it was the first ever
pumping station that didn't require
constant monitoring by personnel on site
the dam that made the whole structure
work consisted of two reservoirs
upper and lower connected by a long
concrete tunnel
the day before the award an inspection
came to the plant to make sure
everything was in order
imagine their surprise when they saw
water spilling out of the upper
reservoir in a powerful cascade
according to the inspectors it looked a
lot like niagara falls
the dam operators immediately stopped
pumping water and sent
divers to investigate it turned out
several water level detectors
malfunctioned
which led to incorrect data being sent
to the computers
until repairs could be done emergency
measures were taken to control the water
levels
they were thought to be fail-safe but
they weren't
on december 14 2005 all systems
both regular and emergency ones failed
to recognize a critical rise in the
upper reservoir again
water started pouring over the wall once
more and this time
no one was present to warn the operators
the waterfall was so powerful that it
quickly eroded the base of the wall
and soon unable to withstand the
pressure from inside
the wall broke the upper reservoir
emptied itself through the breech on the
wall
and sent hundreds of thousands of cubic
feet of water down the slope
the cascade was as wide as two football
field lengths
crushing everything on its way tearing
trees with roots
and destroying much of the park on the
slope of the mountain
then the outpour flowed into the black
river below
making it burst its banks but all ended
well
the escaped water gushed into the lower
reservoir and stayed there for good
it was only by some incredible chance
that no one got seriously hurt in the
accident
and the plant was repaired and
reinforced within the next four years
some broken dams are best left that way
though
in 1907 the people of fergus falls
minnesota
decided to make their lives a bit more
comfortable and built a new dam
on the otter tail river it was supposed
to generate electricity for the town
and it started doing so in 1908 but the
engineers
made a fatal mistake in their
calculations they positioned the dam on
top of water springs
which slowly undermined the whole
structure nobody knew it at the time
though
and the dam was put to work a year later
the two attendants at the powerhouse
noticed the lights
flicker and fade and when they looked
down they saw water
swirling literally over their boots the
men barely managed to escape the
building
when the heavy generator was torn from
its place and rammed through the exact
same spot where they had just stood
they didn't lose time and rode off on
horseback to warn the citizens of fergus
falls
the dam broke right in the middle and
the flood was devastating
the wall of water swished downstream and
broke
another dam on its way adding to the
debris and growing even more terrifying
then the stream tore down a bridge in
the city and continued
wreaking havoc three more dams including
the central one
suffered the same fate and the hurtling
flow made the river flood the
surrounding area
destroying dozens of homes and farms the
next dam on the crazy spills path was
five miles downstream and its owner
managed to get there in time to open the
floodgates
and let the rushing water flow freely
through this made the outpour finally
subside
and the greater disaster was averted
miraculously
despite massive damage done to the city
not a single person was hurt
today the broken down dam as it was
dubbed after the accident
still stays where it was broken in half
and treated
as sort of a tourist attraction